[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i'm here with dr morial
zelikovsky
thank you so much for joining me i'm
super excited um i'm all about
neuroscience so this should be a lot of
fun great to be here
if you can just give people a quick
rundown on your background and what you
do just like a super quick nutshell sure
i'm an assistant professor of
neurobiology at the university of utah
and i work on neural circuits involved
in emotion lately you've been working a
lot of work on social isolation
yeah social isolation right about now is
a pretty hot topic what drew you to
the science of emotion to begin with
um i've always kind of been interested
more in clinically relevant type of
topics and so
you know nothing's really more
clinically relevant than emotions so
what do you mean define clinically
relevant for me um i think these would
be kind of topics of research where
maybe what you investigate would
eventually lead to a cure for something
or treatment or things like that um
in regards to how the human brain works
kind of on an everyday scale
and do you have anything specific that
you're really drawn to or just sort of
hey let me dive into the world of
emotion and see where this goes yeah so
i mean i started out looking at fear and
memory which i i mean i love the field
of memory i thought it's super
interesting
for instance when something really
traumatic happens how you store that
memory across your whole lifespan and
how it affects the way you encode new
memories and interact with other members
of your species and things like that so
i find that found really interesting
both from a scientific perspective and
understanding the neural circuits to
underlie that but also
just from you know understanding human
beings better and why we do what we do
and how we remember the things that
happen to us so
yeah memory and forgetting is something
that is extraordinarily interesting so
my wife will often joke with me that she
wishes that she has my memory because
i'm ultra forgetful in terms of
emotional amplitude so if something like
really upset me i'll still forget about
it
a day later or a week later so i don't
have baggage from my past i don't hold
on to past traumas but it actually
really frustrates me because i also
don't remember a lot of things that i
want to remember
i've always looked at it as a curse and
she's always not always but certainly as
we got deeper into our marriage she's
really like oh man like how how does
that not wind you up how are you not
still pissed about that and i'm like
that seems so weird to me
but i know that memories get basically
tagged for either hey this is important
remember this or you know this is
irrelevant forget it right um
so how how does that dynamic of like
stress i find that super interesting
only because i feel like with most
people when they have an emotionally
charged event it's kind of seared into
their memory in the first place and then
the more times you retrieve it the more
and more you're kind of solidifying that
memory in your brain so usually people
remember these kinds of poignant
emotionally charged memories for a long
period of time whether they do so like
perfectly accurately is another issue
but
um it's usually kind of the more trivial
things that people don't remember so i
find that really interesting about you
and what's your primary area of focus
right now um are you working with rats a
lot like what's your mice yeah so i
think
i would say for like
experimental neuroscience neurobiology
i don't know maybe like 80 percent of
the work is done in mice um for a number
of reasons they're just like you know
great model organism
um and they have they're genetically
tractable meaning you can actually
you know breed them and look at certain
genes and look at certain cell types and
do kind of all the fancy stuff that we
do nowadays in neuroscience and the
applicability to the human condition and
brain is very very high so
and the tests that you're running now
are they are they around fear or what
are you working on right now that you're
super excited about yeah yeah so right
now our lab is working on
a few projects in the lab um and kind of
most of them are circulating around this
idea of social isolation and what
happens to the brain and behavior when
an animal is isolated for an extended
period of time
and so we have a lot of kind of
different projects looking at that and
so the most let's see
most exciting one recently that
is going on in my lab is someone who's
looking at the effects of isolation on
mating behavior
which is kind of a little bit more i
would say maybe more fringe in terms of
interest to the general public
but i think it's super interesting
because he's also able to record a mouse
song so it turns out mice will sing
as a form of courtship to kind of get
the female you know a male mouse will
sting to kind of get the female
interested in it
and so if the animals are isolated it
turns out that both the mating behavior
is disrupted and also this song is
disrupted and so we're doing some pretty
interesting experiments are they singing
when they're alone like trying to
attract or when you put them back
together now they can't sing properly
male mice will sing to a female mouse
as it's trying to court her and it's
it's not it's not anything that any of
us could hear with our naked ear you
need very special kind of ultrasonic
vocalization equipment to be able to
hear this song and to also analyze these
very complex
you know bands of frequency and song
bursts and things like that that
people have been doing in birds for
years and years and so now they're kind
of starting to do it in mice and it's
super interesting
so is it is the song breaking down
because they're essentially getting
depressed is it because they're just out
of practice like what's what's going on
that's a really good question that's
something we're working on we have no
idea
why the song is being altered though it
does i think help to explain why they're
not a successful meeting
i was going to say is it i'm assuming
less attractive that women are less
likely to respond to it yeah it's kind
of like you know if you're at a bar when
we used to go to bars
and a guy's like hey you want to go on a
date versus like hey you want to go on a
date who would you go out with the one
who's you know frequency range is like
really short and doesn't really have
anything interesting going on or the one
that's
able to kind of put some more spice in
their
song or approach so yeah
now it becomes really easy to understand
why humans put so much energy into um or
why isolation is so problematic is a
better way to say it because we're such
a social animal are mice highly social
yes mice are very very social
um and
we work on mating but i also work on
this has kind of been more of the bigger
area of my research violence it's a big
big thing that happens after social
isolation
um so interesting yeah so they they when
you bring them back together they just
want to [__] [__] up yeah they're
extremely violent and actually it's like
one of the best models for looking at
violence which is what i was originally
interested in
so if you isolate almost almost any
species you look at if you isolate them
they will be more violent when you
introduce them back with another member
of their species
that's weird so what was it um what was
the fascination around violence that led
you to that just the thought of humans
can be violent and let me figure out why
it was that and it was kind of at the
time where all these you know school
shootings and things were really picking
up um and you know not just school
shootings but all kinds of uh kind of
violent behavior it was really not not
being looked at so much at a
neurobiological perspective so i was
super interested in
why you know how people can become
really really violent and then when you
start looking into the past of
those kinds of people who you know are
shooters and things there's either a
history of mental health or social
isolation or something like that so um
all right well break it down for me in
terms of the neuroscience so what's
going on at uh neurochemistry level or a
wiring level as as you isolate and
obviously we're extrapolating from mice
into humans but as we um we're living
through a period of such unimaginable
isolation like this seems like a pretty
important um question to get to the
bottom of because already we're seeing
you know pockets of violent outbursts
yeah um and
is this going to escalate would be a
pretty reasonable um question to ask so
what happens during isolation yeah well
i was going to say one thing to add is
during ice after isolation animals are
way more violent but there's a host of
other things that happen too for
instance they're extremely um persistent
in their fear responses so normally you
might be afraid if you hear a car
backfiring or the sound of a car honking
you might be afraid for a second but if
you've been isolated that kind of
persists beyond the kind of normal
window for you to be afraid so this
enhanced fear persistence this enhanced
aggression and then you have
abnormalities really interacting with
other members of your species so
if you're kind of given access to
another friend mouse or a new mouse
you're not going to really spend that
much time with it
or for humans you might not really be
that interested in interacting with a
novel member of your species
and kind of show more hesitation there
so that's those are some of the
behaviors that part i get i get why the
novel
um person would become more worrisome
you're you know going back to the mating
thing you're sort of out of practice
maybe you've lost your groove a bit
um but when i think about inner
reintroducing somebody that you knew
already yeah and you still don't go
spend as much time with them do you know
like are we seeing just the the um
receptors for oxytocin are disappearing
off the cells like yeah why yeah that's
a great question
so i think
i think you know there's some stuff that
we know and there's a lot that we don't
know one thing that we know for sure is
that this one neuropeptide that i've
worked on called tachykinan ii is
heavily upregulated across many regions
of the brain following social and so
tattoo what give me give me some info
what does it do it's kind of like a
neuropeptide so you might lots of people
know about neuromodulators like dopamine
or serotonin these are all the ones that
you know drugs for depression and
anxiety disorders are all based on and
these are just kind of like a smaller
what you'd think of as a smaller class
of those so and is it like oxytocin
feels [__] awesome some people refer
to it as the bonding hormone is it
positive negative that's a good question
but it's again it's one of these smaller
neuropeptide systems so it doesn't have
these kinds of light you can't just kind
of generalize and say that it does x you
know makes you happy makes you sad um so
its expression is way more restricted
than some of these other ones so the
good news is if you find something that
it does that's important or useful
that's great and and the other side of
the good news is that you're not going
to be doing something that kind of
affects the whole brain if you want to
target this system
so you know some of the other systems
like for instance serotonin you know
there's some great benefits obviously
people are using antidepressants
you know developed decades ago
targeting serotonin reuptake but the
downside is it's you're targeting it all
over the brain
and you know serotonin has sometimes
opposite effects depending on where you
look so
um these neuropeptide systems are nice
nice in the way in the sense that you
can kind of target smaller populations
of neurons and um system a system in the
brain that's way less kind of
uh how do i say ubiquitous so
yeah so now did you say that tattoo is
increase or decrease in isolation it's
increased after isolation and it's kind
of and what do we think the the point of
that what what's it pointing at yeah
that's a good point so i i think you
know there's a few ways of looking at it
one is that it's kind of acting in this
kind of coordinated manner much like
someone who leads an orchestra leads the
whole orchestra by his you know
direction and so you see it elevated in
multiple regions and you can kind of
think of it like
a web of increased activity that
allows the brain to coordinate a
response to social isolation that
includes many different things so for
instance the enhanced violence the
persistent fear the alterations in
mating those kinds of things might be
coordinated response and this is one of
the way could be coordinated
which is just this elevation of this
peptide across the brain
okay well that's um
maybe troubling so we have a conductor
who's stepping in but what he's
conducting is
anti-social behavior
uh aggression sort of um
being anti-social so it's interesting so
okay you said there were a few things
that we knew so one we know tattoo is
elevated the conductor's in there he's
telling us to do things but we also know
that
the behaviors that we're seeing on the
outside so if tattoo is conducting it's
conducting some gnarly stubs right um so
we have
so i think what that's a really good
point and i think it kind of ties back
into the idea that this kind of social
isolation where and i'm talking mostly
about when you were fully isolated like
no other single person no partner
nothing you're by yourself
you know have been in your apartment and
haven't seen anyone in two weeks at all
um and i think that is not a normal
situation um not for humans not for mice
not for many species so most of the time
you're interacting with other members of
your species and so you wouldn't have
this kind of explosive response in your
brain or in your behavior so i think um
you know these systems that are usually
probably quite adaptive for regulating
fear which is great and you know certain
to a certain degree because it lets you
survive and avoid dangerous things um
and also probably being able to be
aggressive and protect your territory
for an animal and protect your mate
that's you know something that's
adaptive and so it's really when these
things are
kind of go awry or out of control that
it's not adaptive anymore so it's not
that the system was kind of maybe
designed to do this in some kind of
functionally
you know beneficial way but more it's
more that the system that's usually
adapted at low levels has kind of been
hijacked in these situations that are
you know what i would consider abnormal
for a social species
and when do you see this stuff start to
regulate like is it hey they're violent
and antisocial for a day and then they
begin to normalize they get their song
back or no it's kind of it's a long term
thing in fact with when you're only
isolated for a day or so you have a lot
of actually opposite effects so if
you've kind of been your apartment stuck
in there for a day or two working on a
project by yourself you seek out social
interaction after and you have a lot of
kind of positive type of interactions
with other members of your species it's
really only when this persists for a
long period of time that you kind of
slip into this state that's not adaptive
or beneficial at all in terms of and in
the lab how are we defining a long time
yeah so in the lab with mice it takes
about two weeks um
which you know i'm just trying to think
you know they're usually like live to a
year and a half or two years so
you might that might be like times 50
for a human so i don't know but it's
hard you know it's hard to like make
that exact analogy that's
i don't like making those analogies
do you have any sense of like um
what we should expect from the
unintentional social social isolation
experiment that we're running now so
we're recording this we're what month
five yeah of uh coveted lockdown so is
there
you know do you have a guess on where
our breaking point is or yeah that's a
really good question i i have no idea i
think there's
another big thing that you know is a
factor especially with humans two things
that are factored with humans one is
that um
the
notion of kind of
social media and skype and zoom and all
these ways that we are staying connected
so
to what degree does that actually help
to mitigate those feelings of loneliness
it's hard to say you know
teenagers have been using the new
generation of teenagers have been using
social media for years and years and yet
they report feeling more lonely than
ever so is that how people are feeling
in general right now with social media
or is it actually helping to mitigate
some of the effects of social isolation
so that's one thing and i think that
would that definitely requires kind of
more cognitive psychology experiments
and
lots of studies in humans and things
like that and that's much harder to
model
in a model organism
in the lab because yeah it's like kind
of a specific human thing
and then the other issue is how you are
isolating so
some people are at home with their
immediate family which probably seems
really frustrating sometimes but is also
probably really beneficial so in the lab
if you if you have a mouse that's with
just one other mouse it mitigates tons
of the effects of social isolation
versus people who are in a situation
where they are totally alone in their
apartment right now so i think that's
going to also be a very big difference
um which is like people who have a small
little support group versus those that
have zero so
yeah that woof when you look at what's
going on now in terms of um people
feeling like they they're being sort of
locked up against their will and it's
like who am i even pushing back on
because i can push back on the
government but if i go out and i get
sick it's like you know the virus
doesn't really care so in some ways it's
it's not even people telling me to stay
home it's just and i'll speak for myself
it nobody needs to tell me to stay home
as much as i would now at this point
like to go back out yeah it's i just
don't want to get sick yeah and so and i
really don't want to bring it home to my
wife and so
um
there's no one even to like rail against
right
yeah and i think so it's like i want my
block of wood to chew that lack of
control is hard yeah um walk me through
the um
anatomy maybe the wrong word but walk me
through the anatomy both literally and
figuratively of fear
oh yeah so
fear has come a long way um but yeah i
think the kind of classic anatomy that
people
recognize with fear is the amygdala
which is like this small part of your
brain shaped like an almond and that's
kind of been this you know at the
forefront or center of the fear of
literature and research for a long long
time
um and so since then as i was saying
earlier in the interview there's you
know lots of tools that let you look at
different cell populations in the brain
with a much kind of finer finer tooth
comb and so because of that people have
started to find different subregions of
the amygdala so you know
a lateral part a medial part
a basal part things like that that kind
of do different
components or are involved in different
components of a fear response
and then within those regions there are
certain populations of neurons that are
involved in
you know
increasing fear decreasing fear things
like that so
um that's come a long way what what's
the part that decreases fear and how do
we take control of that right so this
actually it's the same part so
kind of more recently people started
looking at the central amygdala i
shouldn't even say more recently maybe
like 10 years
which is a subdivision of
this kind of amygdala structure
and people have found cells there that
are
kind of active during a fear-inducing
stimulus
and cells that are active when that
stimulus turns off so
there are cells there that in theory do
the complete opposite of emit or control
a fear response
and so that kind of gets at why it's
super interesting and useful that we
have these new tools because in the past
you could just mess up one brain region
and say oh these
you know animals aren't afraid or for
instance i think in humans there's a
very rare condition where the amygdala
gets calcified and those patients are
not afraid at all
that's so crazy so crazy and it's
actually very dangerous for them
so now walk me through how so um
if you had asked me when i was 18
about fear i probably would have said
yeah if i could get rid of it totally i
would
um and then i read a study about
emotions and how we actually can't make
decisions without emotions and because
you can walk through the logic of it all
day but there's nothing to parse whether
like a tuna sandwich is better than a
pizza and when there's no emotion be
like yo pizza's rad uh you you literally
can't do it yeah so they'll just stand
there all day they can give you the
benefits and ultimately you just have to
tell them to eat one um
what what is going on like what do we
use fear for why is it bad to not have
fear like i get it if they're like oh
they don't recognize that getting hit by
a car would suck or whatever but are
there more nuanced ways that fear um is
actually
advantageous and adaptive
yeah i mean i think
pretty much in every
everywhere you look you could see that
fear would be adaptive so yeah you know
there's the obvious cases where you want
to be afraid of fires or very dangerous
kind of environmental stimuli
there's less obvious cases where you
want to be afraid in situations where
you might sense some things off or wrong
and you can't even really put your
finger on it you probably want to be
afraid if you're
in a crowd of like lots of people and
everyone's pointing a gun at you there's
like there's tons of cases where you
might want to be
afraid or aware of the danger in a given
situation um so yeah i guess the
physical dangers i get those those you
know obviously like a gun or a car or
something like that that i get
i'm wondering
yeah like is there is there something
like um fear of being hurt makes you
make wiser decisions like being able to
forecast into the future and saying i'm
afraid of not being able to feed my
family because like i'm thinking about
part of the reason that i would have
said when i was younger
that i would for sure eliminate fear if
i could was fear from at a physiological
level for me fear turns into anxiety
which turns into the blood leaving my
prefrontal cortex and i like i i when i
so i went through debilitating anxiety
and i remember at one point saying to my
wife when i don't have any anxiety i
feel like a superhero i feel like i can
think through things i can be witty i
can solve problems and when i have
anxiety i feel
absolutely moronic like i
i actually can't think yeah and so i
just like i get this like flustered
feeling it's so weird now once i
understood that the blood was literally
leaving my prefrontal cortex and so my
higher level cognition was actually
shutting down yeah it was like okay that
makes sense so there it's like well the
anxiety i mean anxiety might be public
speaking or you know it's not something
life-threatening at least not in a
modern context right and so because it
seems to so easily get out of control
it's like i want to sort of better
understand if it's you know and maybe i
just answered my own question but um you
know if
thinking through things like being able
to predict the future break down if you
don't have fear yeah that's a that's a
really good point i would probably argue
even for those situations a little bit
of fear is good
and you gave the example of public
speaking so you know you're like in the
back of the stage you're about to go
give a talk to a huge audience or
something like that i think like a few
minutes before kind of getting your
heart rate up feeling a little bit
you know i wouldn't say really afraid
but kind of like a little anxious about
you're about to go talking from a bunch
of people
pumping up that adrenaline and then
going out there i think can actually be
really beneficial um but i think
you know
with a lot of these kinds of more
what you're talking about is like
psychogenic fear and anxiety oh yeah
talk to people what what's the
difference between
fear and psychogenic fear oh i just mean
so we were talking about fear kind of
produced by physical
um
stimuli in the environment like someone
pointing a gun at you or something like
that versus fear produced by something
kind of more in your mind or
you know
what you think because some of the
studies on psychogenic stress are
incredibly interesting and it's like if
you translate psychogenic and let me
know if you agree with this if you
translate psychogenic to um self-induced
then it's like okay this gets
interesting and to me it's psychogenic
is um the shakespeare quote nothing is
either good or bad but thinking makes it
so and so
you know when you start getting into
physiological stress you're working too
hard you're running you got punched like
okay those are those are legitimate
stressors that can be measured sort of
as having or they have a um physical
cause right oftentimes externally
when you think about psychogenic stress
now you've got somebody who's um they
didn't get enough likes on their photo
and now they're spinning out of control
or they're isolated and now they're
telling themselves a story about
unworthiness um
walk me through like and and maybe this
feeds into ptsd i'll actually be
interested to hear like how we end up
amplifying the problem for ourselves
yeah i mean i think with humans there's
that there's that disorder generalized
anxiety disorder where it's like you
start amplifying it and then even just
feeling your heart beating fast can
generate its own anxiety disorder so
it's kind of this like vicious cycle
where it's out of you know kind of out
of control in that sense
um
but yeah i think
psychogenic stress i think
very quickly you can go from these like
low levels that are adaptive to these
very high maladaptive levels that make
it difficult for you to function
make it difficult for you to feel you
know
on top of your game or that you're doing
you know
using all of your
skills and resources you know well or
something like that so i think it feels
very paralyzing when you hit a point of
excessive fear and anxiety for most
people
and do have you looked into like how
people begin to unwind this like how do
you if somebody has ptsd which i know
you've looked into a lot how do we how
do we begin to back out of that yeah so
i think like this still kind of the most
typical therapy for ptsd is some form of
exposure therapy it's the same for other
phobias so if you're afraid of flying
you can go to
a clinic and you know get in a fake
airplane and kind of do that repeatedly
over and over and in a form of exposure
therapy or cognitive behavioral exposure
therapy where you kind of re
relive the traumatic event or
experience the cues that predict trauma
without the trauma itself so that's
fairly typical how does that help
so i mean it's actually a lot of that's
also based on rodent research and so
what you do when you do exposure therapy
is you build a new memory so a memory
that actually i can get in this airplane
and everything's gonna be fine i can
drink my wine and eat the crackers or
whatever i can get on this plane and
actually the world's not gonna end it's
gonna be okay so that's you're really
forming a second new memory there
and a lot of people have worked on that
it's called you know extinction learning
or what we think of as exposure therapy
and during that new learning you can
again learn that the plane doesn't mean
something terrible is gonna happen and
then those two memories compete one that
getting on an airplane you know leads to
something terrible and the other that
getting an airplane usually leads to
everything being fine and great and so
um
by doing exposure therapy you're really
kind of strengthening that extinction
memory and you know kind of making that
memory the primary one that you retrieve
when you get on an airplane
the problem with ptsd is unlike other
kind of traditional phobias it's
pretty resistant to that type of
exposure therapy and that's why so many
people still work on it so
other you know therapies for people who
are scared of snakes or scared of planes
and stuff have worked pretty well
but kind of these therapies for people
who've experienced some very horrific
and debilitating trauma
usually don't work that well or if they
work it's pretty short term
so
lots of people are still trying to
understand it and you know why some of
these classic exposure therapy methods
aren't working and what we can do
instead to kind of treat
people with ptsd so in your work on
emotions what's one thing you've come
across that you wish everybody knew
hmm
did i wish everybody knew
yeah that might be useful for people
i actually have a super weird experiment
that i ran while i was a post doc at
caltech
and
so i don't know let's see if how this
comes across it's pretty weird um so i
was doing a
experiment kind of looking at this a
model of ptsd
and i just thought
i thought oh i know i have an idea this
was this is totally an example of like
anthropomorphizing stuff
i thought i have an idea if i give a
bunch of these animals ptsd and then put
them back together
it'll help mitigate the effects kind of
like when you go to a support group for
um you know where everyone else has
suffered trauma and you talk about it
and it seems to make people seems to
result in better outcomes for people and
things like that
so i took some animals i gave them all
ptsd and put them back together and the
next day when i went in
not all of them were even alive they
were they viciously attacked each other
it was horrible their symptoms were even
worse
than if
um than they were if they just hadn't
gone back with other other kind of
members of their species that had the
trauma
and i was very surprised and i was like
whoa what is going on here and then i
decided to run another experiment to
follow up on that where only one of the
animals got traumatized and then i put
it back into the cage with its litter
mates that had not been traumatized and
that seemed to really alleviate the
effects of the trauma so you could
really kind of
um get over the effects of that trauma
or reduce those effects of trauma by
interacting with and being exposed to
you know others and being social but not
others who had had trauma themselves um
and so
yeah
that gave me the chills what do you
think is going on is there
um like i show aggression because i have
ptsd and we and then the other person
shows aggression it's probably something
like that it's probably you know they
all have the same kind of trauma so
there's might be an argument that
when you you know when you're in a group
for other survivors of trauma you have
such different experiences that you're
able to kind of
gain you know perspective and
feel healthy from that interaction
perhaps if you guys were all at the same
in the same you know bad place at the
same time you would associate those
people also at the bad place i'm not
sure but kind of it kind of did make me
think oh maybe it makes sense instead of
going to like support groups is
might make more sense to like go you
know hang out with like your three
closest buddies that are like pretty
psychologically stable and that might be
actually the better thing for you to do
um yeah that was very surprising and
weird
i could talk to you forever thank you so
much for taking the time today where can
people connect with you and see what
you're up to um i have a lab website
zolikovskylab.com
and you can
find me there um yeah i'm uh not really
too much on facebook
my instagram is mostly my climbing stuff
so i wouldn't tell anyone to go there um
yeah and then i'm on twitter also at
morial z
love it
awesome mario thank you so much for
joining me today it was amazing guys if
you're not learning about neuroscience i
really think you're missing a trick um
dive in she's got amazing stuff
obviously what she's doing in her lab is
so fascinating emotions are so critical
um so do check it out and if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
most of us believe
that we see
reality as it is when we look up and see
the moon
it's because there really is a moon and
it would exist even if there were no
observers to see the moon it would still
exist